That will be fine.
That will be perfect.
or most of the things in the library, which is not books, but they include my collection, which is all manuscript books, and the Oriental and the Eros collection, with their wonderful records, books, scrolls, and so forth, music, maps, and the National Foundation.
So it's a fairly wide range, and it goes back from the beginning of the book, it goes back to the beginning of the book, and the origins
most of the world is right up to the present day.
I've just, in the corridor along with my office, I've just passed our latest exhibition, which has come in today in large cardboard boxes, which is the archive of the theatrical agent that we've just bought, and we bought it from her estate.
She's just died.
And it includes no amount of reports of correspondence that have been used for everything.
Now you mentioned British things, but you also have as your mandate, you collect all
Yes, we do.
In 1983, the India Office Library in Redford became part of the British Library, transferred to us by the Foreign Office, and that, of course, was an enormous accession of material relating to the British presence in the Far East, not just
in straight colonial and imperial terms, but in Cading, the East India Company was founded in 1800, with the predecessor of the India Office, which is part of an arm of its government.
So we've got vast archives of all of our Cading links.
with Asia, and also it covers a great deal of the British interest in Oriental cultures.
There's always been a very strong fascination to do with Oriental cultures in this country.
And that has now been amalgamated, the India office now has been wrestled with the old Oriental manuscripts and written books of the British Museum.
So we've got a very, very strong
There's a set of collections on Asian and Oriental cultures in particular for those historic regions.
They include some North African material, but we're not so strong on Africa, thousands of people.
And we are, the library of the whole, is not particularly strong on Latin American material either, where we do collect in that area.
a fascinating aspect because it's not just your own history and culture.
Oh, no.
No, very much not.
And we regard ourselves as being guardians of the world heritage.
And, of course, through digital imaging and various digital devices, we're now able to make that world heritage more available than it has been in the past.
And in a paradoxical way, available to the very sections of the world,
that you're documenting, they may not even have as expensive... Oh, indeed, yes.
We certainly have the finest oriental collections outside Asia.
And we have very close links with libraries in Japan and China, for example, and in India, of course.
Exchanging data, online cataloguing, we exchange with National Diet Library in Japan.
But one of our most exciting digital projects, and I think you're interested in the way that the design is helping.
One of our most exciting and innovative digital projects is based on the Dong Han manuscript, which come from the Dong Han cave.
on the Silk Route in Central Asia, which is now part of Turina.
And this was a cave that was closed in about the 10th century in a Buddhist monastery.
It could be sealed up, containing what was regarded by the Mount Sinai's debris records.
Oh, I've not heard of this.
It was reopened in the very end of the 19th century, and several different explorers, different nationalities, scholars, one by one discovered and purchased material from the cave, and it was scattered.
Some of it came to England through Sir Aurel Stein,
of Hungarian origin.
He had British citizenship.
What was his name again?
Stein.
Did you know that?
There's a book by Stein.
Well, there are several books.
What's his first name again?
Aurel.
He was Mark, M-A-R-T.
Aurel, A-U-R-E-L.
Stein.
He's always known as Sir Aurel Stein.
And Hungarian origin, which became a British citizen.
He was sponsored
jointly by the British Museum of the India, to explore in Central Asia.
And he had several expeditions, four expeditions, during which he caught frostbite and had feet amputated, and God knows what, toes anyway.
It's a very interesting, exciting story.
There's a recent biography of him, by a woman called Annabel Woodcraft.
A British book?
Yes.
W-A-L-K.
I'm about Walker.
A-L-K.
Oh, Walker, basically.
I can't remember the exact title, but it's a sign, in a way.
It's published a lot more years ago.
It almost sounds like the Chirogynesia, in a way.
Is the content more formal?
Was it more... What, the content of the materials that he brought back?
Some of it.
About 60% of it is in the form of Buddhist sutras, religious documents, which have a very formal structure and often are rather tested, I suppose.
But the most exciting thing about the context of the case was that it's a very, very rare fund of material documenting the economic and social history of classical China.
Because, generally speaking,
In Chinese culture, the history of a dynasty would be written by the scribes and scholars of the dynasty.
After the end of the dynasty, the scribes and scholars of the next dynasty.
And then they would destroy the documents because they were written in the definitive version as far as they were confirmed, and that was the end of the century.
So it's very rare to find surviving documentation of ordinary knights in China, especially from that early period.
So what it had in a cave, or those caves, plural, in the monastery, in this monastery in Deng Phan, was material from the 4th to the 10th century.
the classical Chinese period, which had been sealed up, not rediscovered until the end of the 19th century.
Were they meant to be hidden, obscured?
I don't know why they were sealed up.
My colleagues made it.
They were essentially lost to knowledge, to human knowledge.
But how do you spell the name of the cave research again?
Dunfan, D-U-A.
H-U-A-N-G.
A-N-G in Huang.
Now, our project is an international project, but we're taking the lead, but it's based on the British Library, and we are marrying up the collections that were dispersed after the cave was opened up.
And there are four main places where there's materials to be found.
That is in Gere, in the British Library, in the Bibliotech National, in Paris, in Petersburg, and in Good King.
with scattered bits in Japan, other parts of China, a lot of very closely related material from other parts of the country in Berlin.
Using very good resolution scanning, we are able to pull together a total catalogue
or to contests in the cave of Des Moines, and even to marry up fragments, you know, where in Paris there may be a fragment for me, a matching fragment of here.
So you can match them on the stage.
In a sense, reassemble a lot of the heritage.
And we just, two days ago, it's very much in my mind, but it's just completely funding from our heritage lottery bank for the next three years' work.
It's all that.
It's not something we can afford to do with our nationality.
This is President of Waller League.
We call it the International Film Film Project.
Is there any literature on it?
Yes, I will make sure I send it to you.
I think I gave away my last leaflet yesterday, so I'll ask you to go and find one for you.
Sure.
That's fascinating.
And we have just a little bit to play.
Some of the original material you'll see.
Do you want to handle the tape of it?
Here's something from my collection.
The Diamond Sutra.
All we've got at the moment on display is a croquis, it's a diamond sutra, because we are engaged in some very delicate conservation work.
And that comes, I think that, am I writing a memory?
I think that's brilliant.
Thank you.
doesn't say but it's it's the earliest example of printing this is the earliest printing this is about that unfortunately the original is in another building at the moment it's about a thousand years before gutenberg i think right well it was it was it was in the in eight something uh this is your gutenberg being used in korea
before this date.
This is the earliest European example.
It's quite a beautiful stage, the decorations there.
I've never ever seen decorations before.
I don't know whether you've got the display of the Timbal Bible in the United States.
I missed it.
No.
What about it?
It's been in New York, and then it was going to the Huntington's.
I missed it.
Our copy, which we bought just last year, is also illuminated rather like this.
It's printed, but with hand illuminations, which is rather nice.
That's a hand, those are hand illuminations there.
I thought you thought that we're at the point that in time that you probably, and I'm sure you've written about this, but it was rather analogous to the Erasmian period, when the text was
people's conception of the text was very fluid, a very changing dynamic from the manuscript text to the printed text.
And very often the marriage of manuscript and print is still going on.
Their whole approach to what constituted the definitive version is being transformed.
I just found a book yesterday that I've been looking for in the Abbott Trithemius.
Of course it was quite...
wrote about this, you know, it was right during that period, it was about 40 years after Gutenberg.
Oh, yes.
And he thought that the printing press was going to destroy the whole concept.
I'm wishing you can't talk to things.
We've been through it.
We have an education service.
This is very nice.
British Library Education Service Primary Schools Workshops.
Sorry.
Chinese books and you're in your purview again.
Yes, that's right.
This wood slip comes from the case of Deng Kwan.
I want to write this down.
It's in the groovy desert.
Yes.
So the conditions were right to preserve it too?
The conditions were right to preserve it.
It's not so good for the explorers, even at the end of the 19th century.
And this is from 206 BC.
Wow.
Do we have an estimated date on that there?
Well, it could be in the early 90th century.
I don't think we have a chance to think of around that.
Okay.
Now this one, does that come from Dunhuang?
I'm not sure.
Yes, that's one here.
This is one of the formal Buddhist manuscripts that I described to you.
Unlike some of the other explorers who came after him, Stein didn't speak Chinese.
He was an amazing linguist and he had about 20 oriental languages but not Chinese.
So he didn't know what he was taking away.
And as a result, that's why about 60% of what he took was all this very formal religious documentation, which is so beautiful, very interesting, the scripts are very interesting.
But then, in fact, he missed another to put up some of the really more fascinating material.
He was judging the whole of the beauty of the physical.
Yes, that's right.
And also, it was a little smash-and-grab ring.
He couldn't spend that long there.
This is from John Brown as well.
What is his name, Sir Argus?
Yes.
It's called the Cave Library.
Well, that's, yes, that's the description.
In fact, it was a dump.
In the Annabel Walker biography, there's a photograph of Stein.
I think in that cave, anyway, you can see, because I have seen, if not in that book, that it was all piled up high, like when the cave was unseen.
It was quite clear that things had just been thrown in.
It was intentional.
Yes.
One of the things that these scribes from classical China did for civil servants was that they would use wood blocks and they would write notes on wood blocks and then shave them off until the wood was all shaved away.
They just went on using it as a notebook.
And there were all these wood shavings
This almost compares, in a way, to the chiroganesia, you think, in a way?
Yes, yes, I think in a sense.
In a sense, where that stuff was, I guess, all thrown away.
Yes, that was the Don Juan stuff was.
And so is Cairo, I think.
Yes, I suppose that's right.
I'm thinking, yes, you're right, you're right.
I'm thinking of Alexandria more, and of course Alexandria is a very different thing, because that was the library.
That's right.
No, no, I'm thinking, they called it the Genesio, and it was part of a synagogue where they found all this buried material.
Oh, right, yes.
So it does compare, yes.
And it was considered a refuse, but there were daily records of ancient, in a way it is.
I have to be kept from the India office building on Blackfriars Road, where they've been since the 1960s, and they will move from there straight into the country, the end of next year.
But we've got these samples on this year.
And we'll have a fabulous collection of Korans.
Thanks to this year.
and financial terms, which is always a problem, that we do have real security worries.
You're not alone in that one.
We're thinking about, in partnership with a commercial publisher, we're thinking about producing a facsimile of one of these, not this particular Quran.
There is a Bayadar Quran, which we've got over.
Is that on paper?
No, I think.
That would be the parchment.
Yes, maybe.
There's a...
A story about our earlier conservation techniques, a story against the libraries, British Museum libraries, that we have some very important Buddhist religious work, some Hindu religious work, and one of the Vedas needed rebinding, and they've rebinded in the past.
You have to be so careful which material is appropriate in which religious work.
In relation to digitisation and several issues, we lent the Lindisfarne Gospels to an exhibition in Newcastle last year.
which was very well attended and we were very pleased to be able to do it.
They're obviously terribly precious and terribly vulnerable, so we don't lend them except to the North East about once in 50 years.
Following that, there has been a campaign mounted by Newcastle Valley Council to say that the Lindisfarne Gospels should be returned to the North East, which is their spiritual home.
And it raises, of course, all sorts of questions about collections and general public access to a world-class inheritance.
And the idea of the original and the sort of mystic sense that inheres in the original.
What we want to do, we can't possibly say that we would
we store this item and then another item and then another one and so on and so forth.
I mean, the whole sort of what we do for displaying manuscripts heritage for the public from all over the world, Christian world heritage, you know, would be sort of decimated.
But what we do want to do is to do a digitised version on our Turning the Pages technology.
of the illuminated pages and decorations in the Lindisfarne Gospel, probably amounting to something like 30 pages.
Amounting to what I'm saying?
Something to the order of 30 pages altogether.
They aren't all as richly decorated as these.
Interesting, you talked about... You call it the turning... Turning the pages, yes.
It's a technology that we've pioneered which will be unveiled officially when we open our exhibition galleries in the new building next March.
And basically it involves extremely high resolution computer photography and then some very sophisticated editing using simulated shadows and so forth so that you can
put your finger on the bottom corner of the computer screen and turn the page and go like this, literally, and the page turns.
So what we can do, Peppa, I hope it will be different from, but in some way better than, having the original just in one place in the region where it originally was produced.
is to provide in several places, with any number, potentially, this very, very expensive hardware with this very, very expensive program, which we call turning the pages.
And schools and the public can come and turn the pages.
They can see all the illuminated pages.
We're not offering to do the whole lot because the damage to the manuscript potentially is so much greater.
But all the decorated pages we're offering to show them, they can see them all at one time.
Whereas now, if you visit the Newspan Gospels, you see this, which is beautiful, but, you know, it's tantalizing.
So it's different from the original.
We would be the very first to say it is not the same as having the original, but in some ways it's actually, there's more access.
Is this the technology that was developed here?
Yes.
Yes, we're very proud of it, but we haven't yet unveiled it.
I mean, I'd come back to see it, actually.
Well, it will be available on a permanent basis in our galleries from next March.
at the new building.
We'll still be working on it.
It's time to come down.
Yeah.
So, it is, I mean, we've displayed it at meetings of our board and preparing the ministers with them, that sort of thing.
But we haven't yet got it to the stage where we can mount it.
We've got two examples mounted on the prototype at the moment.
One is the sport for ours.
which I think is on my hand now.
We'll have a look in a moment.
And the other one is the Leonardo da Vinci notebook.
Which one?
Our notebook.
No, not Bill Gates'.
We were just completing our work on that when Bill Gates announced that he was going to digitise his.
And one of the things you can do with the Leonardo notebook on this technology is...
There's an icon called Mirror.
You press that, and you know he kept his note from the mirror writing.
If you press Mirror, it produces the image so that you can read it.
Now, do I understand this?
You'll be able to buy a CD and do this, or you have to come and see the turning pages that you're in?
Well, it's extremely expensive.
And the hardware at the moment, I mean, it takes...
If we were to do the 30 pages or so of the Lindisfarne Gospel Swift Decoration, you would need a gigabyte of RAM, which means one whole machine all to itself.
So it's not really at this sort of CD-long level.
Well, will it be on a screen or will it be like a physical book?
Yeah, it's on the screen.
It's on the screen, but it's a screen...
where you see the image of the book as close as possible, the same size as the original.
And then you turn, you touch the screen, turn the page, and you can zoom, so you can see an enlargement, digitised enlargement of the detail.
I mean, if you wanted to see the brush strokes, that would guide you.
Will it give you a crinkling sound?
No, I don't think so.
No, he said prinkle when you turn it back.
Parchment is quite silent.
That's right, yeah.
But no, there's not going to be a sound or smell or visual.
And it will be able to return some of the heritage.
In a way, yeah.
Well, yes.
I mean, I think this is the same problem that American libraries and museums face.
we do all over the Western world, it's questioned restitution and nobody can deny that in some instances some of the materials we have were taken from foul means rather than fair, some were purchased, you know, there's a whole spectrum of virtue attaching to why we have these things.
And I think that digital imaging is an enormous step forward in helping us to be
give back the heritage while still taking care of the regional and keeping it within our collections as part of the intricate collection.
You've given me something I hadn't even thought of.
I hadn't even thought of this, you know.
It's like the Elven Marbles, for instance.
It's a whole other issue.
I think with manuscripts, we're on a winning ticket here because you can actually have papers
You can see the whole thing, and that in some ways is better than seeing the original.
With the Elk in marbles, you can't quite see that.
That's right.
It's a different issue.
But I mean, the issue is similar.
It's almost resolving.
It's very exciting.
Do you have anything to speak of the original and what it meant?
Yes.
And I thought maybe you could talk about that a little bit.
Well, that's...
a different issue, isn't it?
I mean, it's all connected with this, with the Lindisfarne gospel.
I don't think people will ever lose a sense of awe at seeing the original, just to be in the presence of something that's survived for that long, or which has attached to it, has been touched and created by somebody they think is special.
I mean, it's just
Another example is the Beatles alone.
We have some manuscripts of the Beatles on display just back through there, and they're also very popular, and they're very special to people who have known the Beatles, who grew up in the 60s, like me.
So, I mean, there are all kinds of reasons, and it's not always what one might describe necessarily as a spiritual feeling, but it's just the thought that this is the original, this really is a place
produce has an irreplaceable importance, I think.
But I think that one must avoid being, I don't want to use a pejorative word, but I was going to say sentimental.
I think if you can use it as a neutral word, one must not allow sentiment to
govern what happens to these artifacts.
It seems to me that the most important thing of all is that they be preserved.
And after that, then, of course, the second most important thing is that there must be access to them.
But unless you preserve them, well, you can't give access.
And national libraries and museums can very often provide very much higher quality preservation and better means of access
some other places.
And then there is also, of course, the question of bringing together a critical mass of a collection rather than just one beautiful object seen out of context.
We have a very large collection, very beautiful manuscripts, Bibles, and other religious texts from other religions from all over the world.
And it's important to people from all over the world to be able to come and see these together in one place.
And it means something to them as it's the original.
It's just as much as it would mean to the people who reside in a particular region to have that single original there.
So there are irreconcilable interests on that.
I can't say how important that is.
It's kind of what we came to discuss.
Thank you.
One of the things that's so beautiful about the Sherburne Missile is its birds.
Some wonderful and very lifelike paintings of birds you get in the margins.
And another thing about it is that we know, as we do with Lindisfarne, we actually know the names of the scribes and the artists
who put the manuscript together.
This is very rare, of course, for this period.
And we have portraits of them.
They keep cropping up.
They're not just there.
They put themselves in all over the place.
They preserve themselves.
I've never seen them actually put portraits of themselves.
This is on loan.
And we are going to have to negotiate to purchase it.
And this is another issue that all libraries and museums are sort of standing face, that we attract loans and deposits, and in the past we've got trepidly put a lot of resource into looking after the material, making them available.
And then a new generation of the family that owns it comes along, they face a new tax bill, and they want to sell it.
We've invested a lot.
uh in in making it available we feel we have an obligation to continue to keep it in the public domain uh something as rare and beautiful as this we feel we must attempt to purchase so of course we again we have to try and raise the money in this case we hate from the heritage lot we fund but that's um
constant pressure on us at the moment.
A lot of the material we've been given on loan is now going to be put up for sale and I don't expect we can keep all the shame.
That's the Duke of Northamble and Toronto, is that correct?
Yes, that's correct, yes.
It's quite beautiful.
And the condition is incredible.
Well, I mean, could you designate it a national present?
No, I don't know, I think it's formfully like that, except that's
There are countries which do that.
You know better than I do which ones.
I think they do this in France.
It has been discussed in this country whether we could produce a sort of, as we do, lift buildings as being of historic importance.
Could we have a sort of lift of works of art and manuscripts?
We decided that that would be a very dangerous route to take.
Partly it would encourage an absolute stampede of people who were afraid that their treasures were about to be listed.
The avoidance and evasion of such a list to me would create more damage.
And it sustains it right here a major masterpiece of English art.
Yes.
Well, we call ourselves
try to call ourselves the National Gallery of Medieval Art.
Because, of course, medieval art is preserved in books and in ways that it wasn't, in walls, chapels and churches and big houses and so forth.
So, I mean, yes, I think the masterpieces of English medieval art is better preserved here than anywhere.
The British Museum collections, which these were, were of course very important foundation collections.
and quite a few.
The Lindisfarne Gospels, for example, were part of the collection of C. Robert Cotton, the Elizabethan antiquary.
we have a priceless collection of medieval and Tudor manuscripts from the collections of Cuffin, which through his air came to the British Museum as one of its foundation collections in 1753.
He's one of the heroes of my first book.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, forgive me for telling you all about him.
Have you read Colin Tite's Panizzi lecture?
Yes, yes I have.
Oh, good, good.
Well, you know... I used it as a source this morning.
Oh, really?
Good.
Oh, I'm delighted.
Well, that means he's been useful.
Well, of course, there's Cotton, the other people's foundation collections of Sloan and Harley, very closely followed by the Royal Manuscripts of George II, which came to the library, to the Meuse British Museum Library in 1757, four years, I think.
But we go on collecting.
We've just this week learned that we should be able to purchase a leaf in Merovingian script.
And we were lacking Merovingian script, so we're rather pleased about that.
I'm just going to follow up on that statement you just made.
We go on collecting.
You know, there are institutions that have more or less put on hold in collecting.
They feel they have so much, they have to absorb what they have.
We don't have that kind of an attitude here.
Definitely not, no.
Although, because of the budgetary cuts, we think, I am facing at the moment a planned reduction to zero,
in 18 months' time.
We may not have an acquisition budget for manuscripts in 18 months' time.
I'm sure you'll get all comfortable.
Well, my worry is, I mean, this is a glamorous thing, but we have an obligation to continue to preserve the national heritage for future generations, to do for the future what the World of Cotton did for us.
We need to maintain the capacity to purchase.
We've got to be out there in the field with good relationships with dealers, known to have a budget, known to be purchasing.
known to be a place that's worth approaching if somebody needs to sell their family archives or whatever it might be.
And I'm very concerned that if we, even just for a year, which is what's planned, if we go down to zero, this will all begin to integrate.
They'll go elsewhere with the... You don't want that.
Do you have any priorities in your collection?
Yes, well, we build on our strengths.
That's the first priority.
So, for example, we would be interested in additions
really first great edition of the medieval collections, like the Merovingian scriptures that we just come up with.
Our strengths also include statesman's political papers, and we do try to collect those, and that's an area where we would try to wish to increase our strengths in the 20th century.
We're not so strong for the 20th century material, for political papers.
We're very, very strong on English 20th century literary manuscripts, and in fact, pre-20th century works by
Milton, the great galaxy of original manuscripts of 19th century writers and 20th century, the archive I mentioned is just coming today.
the 20th century theatrical collection.
So those are strengths.
And then of course religious materials we're known for and huge numbers of violent groups come together.
So we're always interested in that.
And we're always interested because
and making people's notion of what's important primary material is the theory.
Do you have a budget that you can disclose?
Oh, yes.
I disclose for both.
The overall budget for manuscripts this year, quite badly cut, was a little under £600,000.
But we've actually spent... That's acquisitions, right?
Yeah, acquisitions project.
That was for manuscripts, not for the other materials I'm responsible for.
We've actually spent about 1.5 million.
We've spent a lot of other people.
So you're a player.
You've decided to be a player.
We're the biggest player in manuscripts practicing in this country.
One of the biggest, obviously, in Europe.
And...
Therefore, actually very important as far as the preservation of unique material is concerned, that we should continue to be, because if we were removed from the theme, one of the things that would happen is people would start making small rocks for collecting.
and putting things into the sale rooms straight away.
Collections would be dispersed.
And broken up.
Exactly.
That's the point.
They'd be broken up.
If they go to a university library in the United States, for example, they're going to be publicly available and we can swap the catalogs, digital images or microforms or whatever.
And they're professional people taking care of them.
Well, exactly.
And they're available to scholars.
I mean, it may be an inconvenience, but that's
That's minor.
Last year we were unable to purchase some materials and correspondence of Edward Elgar, the Composer World.
We didn't think we would have the budget to do it, and we were approached privately by the doulas to buy the whole lot, and we said we couldn't do so, and it was broken up into about 38 lots, and some of them were sold to private collectors, some of them remain unsold.
And that's really very sad.
That is.
That's too bad.
We will be more and more effective in that pain, I'm afraid.
That's great.
I don't know how much... Well, David, it's very kind to mention that.
You've got an awful lot of tape in that tiny machine.
As David was kind to mention that, I came to the library from the University of London four years ago and while I was in the University of London I was the administrator of the Institute of Historical Research and I was one of the people appointed to the History Working Group on the National Curriculum.
In the year of 1989
So we spent a large part of unpaid voluntary time in 1969 with the committee of ten of us, which increased to twelve, making recommendations for the national curriculum in history.
So I can't speak from personal experience about a curriculum in literature, but we don't have the same fierceness of debate about the canon.
And of course Shakespeare is...
much closer to us.
Well, it's actually pretty close to us.
Well, he is indeed.
I mean, like Trindle and all the rest of the founders of the modern English language.
But it's a very sad thing, I think, in a manner that one watches with dismay.
But it's not happening here.
Well, I mean, there are just a handful of universities that require English majors to take courses in Shakespeare, Bell, Ruth, Charles, and Spencer.
Yes.
Doubtably they do, but they're not required to.
And Amherst College, one of the great, great colleges in America, recently graduated a summa cum laude in English, who had never taken any of those courses.
I mean, how could he possibly call himself a literature major, but don't call yourself an English major?
That concerns me.
You obviously don't have that same kind of... No.
Lack of focus here, shall we say.
As far as I'm aware, the national curriculum only goes for school children up to the age of 16, which is when compulsory schooling ends.
And in the case of history, greatly to my grief, we were given the task of it was going to be compulsory up to the age of 16, but it was cut back to 14 just after we'd finished our work.
So a lot of what we recommended was immediately irrelevant, and in any case
needed to be redesigned, and it's a fascinating experience.
As far as English is concerned, that is compulsory about the way through literature and language to the age of 16.
But it's at the A-level stage, you know about the system in this country, well, advanced level or A-level examinations taken by school kids from 16 to 18, basically.
My daughter's just about to embark on English history and French.
She's 16.
And you have to choose generally three subjects.
Occasionally, especially if you're doing two maths, you might do four.
But the English curriculum at that level, there are different examination boards, but I don't know of one that does not include Tulsa and Shakespeare.
So in other words, if you've done English at school,
to A level, you already had to do the children in Shakespeare.
And my two children, they put Chaucer in the primary school.
Oh, my goodness.
I can remember my son, I mean, he really rather enjoyed, I think, was it The Nun's Tale, or, you know, he was quite bawdy, whichever.
The Miller's Wife, I think, he was given.
He had to write a sort of poem inspired by the Miller's Wife.
I remember these things, helping Kip with their homework.
So, they do feature.
But, I'm sure there will be people who would attack it, but I think it's unlikely.
We don't, in my opinion, I think, in British culture, we don't suffer... any cultural fashion is not quite so pervasive as it will be in the United States.
So political correctness is not a... it doesn't dominate in the same way.
as it does in the United States.
And you don't get the same sort of intellectual fashions which become a sort of rooted doctrine.
No.
It's a central chapter in this new book that I'm writing.
It's very interesting.
So there's no problem.
There is an understanding of what the core knowledge should be.
There are core knowledge.
Well... I mean, as a historian, I...
rather resist the idea that there is a core knowledge.
But I didn't like what the Thatcher government was trying to do on my subject, which is history, which was to say that it must be very nationalist and it must push the national side.
And they were expecting that we would
put in place an assessment system, which in effect would have said that some facts were more important than other facts.
And as a historian, I resist that.
I think that's... Did that happen?
To a very limited extent, but our working group refused to make such recommendations, and it became very much the centre of a political storm about it.
I mean, we weren't saying...
We were saying everybody should know about Shakespeare and everybody should know about Henry VIII, but we were saying they must do it in the same last steps.
You know, we wanted to leave teachers with the latitude to teach within a chronological framework about 50% of the history of this country, but also the history of other cultures we thought was very important, world history.
And we were told it would be absolutely scandalous for any school child to get away with doing less than that.
half of their historical learning specifically about Britain.
There's a very sort of Little England approach to it.
Well, it sounds like a political agenda was being imposed upon the curriculum to a degree.
Well, I don't know to what extent Satch has realised who was doing it.
It was herself personally.
She took a very close interest, although she's never had a training in history herself.
But there's a very sort of simple approach that says, you know,
national greatness.
So I mean I would agree, I would be standardised if my children did learn from Shakespeare as part of their general education, let alone at the university if they were doing anything.
But I think there's a lot of debate to be had about how far you take the concept of the core
In English literature, it may be a different question from history, and I've addressed it for history.
It's not just history, of course, but we don't have the purpose of her and the foreknowledge program on the university.
I've looked at some of the late curricula.
When we were working on the national curriculum, California and New York both come through the recommended curriculum for history, I think.
It's a very different approach.
there from what we adopted.
A much greater sense of the great national project being unfolded through history, which is not very British.
Can I email you?
Yes, of course.